And how their lives might forever be. Affected.
By.
Though. By those matters.
I particularly also tried to. remind them that the
completion of a degree was vital,
that while a few of them might have a chance
of playing in the National Football League, that
there were more
that The numerical odds
of that
were certainly not very likely.
To the black students, I tried to alert them by
noting that every year there were more black
students graduating from law schools
or medical schools
than who played in the NBA, the NFL, and organized
baseball.
On one of those occasions, I remember chatting
privately
with a young man from Jasper, Texas,
a superb running back.
who seemed to have a marvelous future.
I ask him if he had ever thought
what he might do
if his knee,
if he had a severe injury to his ankle or knee.
Instantly he stopped.
Instantly he assured me that he had never been hurt
and never would.
When I pursued the point further and asked him But
what if it did happen?
He assured me that no one had ever before asked him
to consider that reality.
Later,
after an all too brief career,
with the Atlanta Falcons.
He did have a severe knee injury, which terminated
his playing days.
Among the most
delightful
athletic memories, of course, are those related
to Randy Matson, But I believe I put that on the
other tape. If I have not, I will add those later.
As the Ballard years progressed, the team began to
win regularly.
And the national rankings went higher and higher.
Aggies began to dream of top 10 rankings
and maybe even a national championship some year.
And a national championship soon.
We academics began to worry about graduation
rates and whether or not athletes were given
special breaks in the courses they took
and the grade requirements
in those
classes.
The climax
of the Ballard years, following bowl games,
winning records, came in a year in which the Aggies
were highly rated in preseason rankings, open
with victories over Kansas
and Clemson, both of which were supposedly were
very good teams.
But the Aggies thrashed them.
And by the end of the year, it was obvious that both
squads were overrated.
Then the Maroon team went to Houston to play the
Cougars and the Astrodome and were thrashed. The
following week, they came back to Kyle Field to
play the Baylor Bears
and lost a close game
on a, quote, hideout play, quote, and what a number
of critics thought
was Superior coaching strategy.
From the green and white or from the green and gold
bench.
Paragraph.
Monday afternoon in the Koch building without any
planning.
Vice Presidents Prescott Vestal. Coldest and I
without any prior planning ended up in Dr.
Miller's office for one of our comparatively
regular post-workday discussion sessions.
Quickly, we mentioned the alumni frustration and
anger that we heard after Saturday's game.
Dr Miller indicated that he had perceived similar
sentiments.
And we told him that he had better get ready for a
whole bunch of letters, phone calls and other
pressure to get rid of Ballard, but that we hoped
that he would resist that, those sentiments,
because in our opinion, Coach Ballard was running
an honorable, reputable, and quality program.
And that while he was not going to win the national
championship, he sure was doing better than the
coaches we remember.
In the middle of the conversation, Dr. Miller
said, asked
our opinion,
Dr. Miller exclaimed, quote, but even if he wasn't
the head coach, we'd want to keep him as the
athletic director. Quote, dash, since in those
days, the head football coach was also the
director of athletics. We agreed that, yes, his
opinion was correct, but that that wasn't the
point, but it was keeping him as football coach,
which really mattered.
Paragraph, we were unaware that Steve Pringle,
one of Dr. Miller's assistants, was standing in
the doorway. and heard our conversation.
Soon, either that evening or the next morning, he
summarized the conversation
to one of the campus's most respected student
advisors, Dr. R.C. Potts, the Associate Dean of
Agriculture, who had been, who had helped Steve
for many years.
Then Dr. Potts
passed
his summary of the conversation on to, and I can't
remember this man's name, the
chief, the director of Kane Hall the athletic
dormitory, who had been the coach at Angelo Junior
College back when Emory had been the head football
coach at San Angelo High School.
Then that close friend of Coach Ballard's
discussed the Monday afternoon meeting With the
head coach.
And apparently.
The. Facts of the discussion.
Had gotten.
Altered a great deal.
As they passed. through that number, that quartet
of hearers.
Thus, on a Wednesday morning,
at about 10.30 or so, I was stunned When President
Miller
hurried into my office
looking pale and sounding excited as he
exclaimed, Emory Ballard just resigned.
He continued to say by saying that the coach had
called just before coming over and asked for an
opportunity to talk to President Miller
immediately.
Then when he came in, he indicated that he had
understood that there had been a meeting at which
Dr. Miller had discussed the termination, his
termination, the coach's termination, with some
of his key advisors. Dr. Miller tried to assure him
that that was not a correct report
and apparently mentioned in his summary that even
if you were not our coach, I would still want you as
the athletic director.
That statement seemed to
the worried visitor to confirm the reports he had
heard and so he immediately expressed his
resignation
effective immediately and walked out
paragraph I then tried to persuade Dr. Miller that
he needed as quickly as possible to select a new
head football coach When he asked why that must be
done so rapidly. I tried to persuade him. Since he
had no athletic experience.
That football coaches that football teams. Did
not operate without. A head coach.
When he asked what his choices were. I told him that
the obvious selection would be either the Chief
Defensive Coordinator or Offensive
Coordinator.
The first of whom had compiled a good record but was
the subject of some community criticism because
of his operation of a liquor store at Southgate.
Then Dr. Miller asked for an evaluation of the
offensive coordinator, Tom Wilson.
I gave him an affirmative endorsement, but noted
that Coach Wilson
had the disadvantages of being of a great
disadvantage of being a graduate of Texas Tech and
a former Red Raider quarterback.
Paragraph. The result of the conversation became
obvious about mid-afternoon when I happened to
look out the window, west window of my office to see
Tom Wilson and Marvin Tate walking back toward
their offices at G. Raleigh White Coliseum,
their feet barely touching the ground and each
patting the other on the back. Marvin, having just
been promoted from Associate Director of
Athletics,
Marvin, who had been doing most of the work of
athletic director anyway. Now it was given that
title of director of athletics and Tom Wilson
became the head coach, the new head coach.
The paragraph, the Wilson era got off to a fairly
good start. And in the fall of 79, we ended
up in a bowl game in Birmingham, Alabama. And I
think maybe even won the game.
And so there was optimism about football as we
moved on to El Paso. Meanwhile, elsewhere in
athletics, There was always noise
and varying degrees of criticism and
compliments. In basketball, Shelby Metcalf had
been the head coach for a number of years,
succeeding Bob Rogers in the early 60s.
Shelby would probably say that he won nothing if he
wasn't funny because he always had a quick
and pleasant response filled with humor to any
statement regardless of how positive or
negative.
He,
in the late 70s, his teams were winning very well.
And we used to look forward to playing the
Longhorns
and the Razorbacks.
At this point, I can't remember the name of the
colorful coach of Longhorns.
But Eddie Sutton. Slick Eddie. To his former
teammates at Oklahoma State.
And later to his coaching competitors.
Had moved Arkansas. Up near the top. When either.
The orange
horns. are the Redbacks, came to play at G. Raleigh
White. The place was filled with enthusiasm and
noise. In those days, they would introduce the
visiting team and coaches first,
and then the announcer would say, and now,
The Texas Aggies. And we would try to see how long we
could yell loud enough to drown out the PA system.
One night against Arkansas that yelling went on
for at least 10 minutes. And Eddie first became
frustrated, then angry. And then so.
Uh. wild in his anger that he ripped off his coat and
threw it to the floor which of course added to the
noise from the home crowd. Needless to say that
evening the Aggies walked away with a winning
score.
There were countless
There were countless. Shelby isms.
But we were winning and I remember. And during
spring break. Of 1980 1980. After
we had been selected for the appointment at UTEP.
And we went to visit El Paso. We stopped in Fortune
Locton to spend the night on the way back.
Our three sons and I went out into the station wagon
and drove near the back of the parking lot where we
could barely pick up the broadcast
of the Aggie game against the Louisville
Cardinals in what would have been the Sweet Eight
tournament. And finally, in overtime,
Louisville beat the Aggies and went on to win the
NCAA championship.
Their two remaining games were not as close. The
margin of their victory was not as close as in the
Aggie game. So those of us with maroon vision all
wondered, about whether or not the Aggies would
have won the NCAA championship in 1980 if
they had been able to beat Louisville
in that close game. Paragraph track was a big
spectator sport in those days with the meets held
in Kyle Field, where the oval ran around the
football field.
Among the individuals that attracted my closest
interest was Ted Nelson,
whom I had first seen in an amateur meet in Houston
when Ted was a junior in high school I believe.
And he and his mile relay teammates had come to run
against the University of Houston team,
which went on to score high to place well in the NCAA
national meet.
Ted, comparatively average in height, but filled
with talent
and more blessed, even more blessed with
determination, ran a marvelous anchor and almost
beat Olin Cassel, C-A-S-S-E-L-L, one of the best
quarter milers in modern decades. He came on to A&M
and was in one of my freshman history sections.
There, just as in track, he demonstrated his
tireless determination
and always was trying to improve his grade through
hard work.
Then after graduation, he stayed on as an
assistant coach
And then finally
was promoted to the head coach position, which he
now handled, where
he now serves with real distinction. He, for me, is
another of those coaches that I would be proud to
have as a role model. for one of our children.
He always was kind, always setting a good example
and always hoping to win with integrity.
well let's see we left Kerrville about 10 or 15
minutes ago and I'm now looking at my notes
and I'm wondering if I have said anything in this
about Ann Pittman who was my secretary for
most of the 1970s.
And a native of western Kentucky, comparatively
diminutive in height,
but standing very tall in capability,
determination,
and dedication to her task, came to College
Station with her
army husband and two little boys.
Somewhere about the time that she joined me,
her husband literally left her and the boys And so
she became the primary breadwinner
for them and herself.
She always was a splendid
asset to me and to the workforce
and the larger office of the Vice President for
Academic Affairs.
Always ready to do the extra task, but never
hesitant to give me candid, honest advice and
counsel
on the many occasions when I needed it.
She seemed flawless in her typing,
because in those days we were not yet on the
computer. Thank goodness electric typewriters
were available so that she could incorporate
all of the many changes which I
wanted to make in drafts of letters and speeches.
Paragraph, I particularly remember how many
times she typed my remarks for the last
speech that I made at A&M, the commencement
speech,
one of the three commencement speeches in the
spring of 1980. In those remarks, I attempted to
use as my theme that The graduates and I all were
beginning new lives. And
that dash, hopefully dash, we would use
everything we had learned up to that point